[Music]
very good morning
welcome to breakfast with dan walker and
louise mentioned headlines for you this
morning
a trial of the oxford astrazeneca
vaccine in children has been paused
while an investigation takes place into
whether the jab is linked to rare blood
clots in adults
leading scientists urged the public to
continue getting the jab
saying the benefits far outweigh the
risks the risks
of getting sick or dying of covid for
all the people currently being offered
first in second doses
are far and away greater than any small
theoretical risk that may exist
relating to these cases which are
extremely rare
lifting the shutters on the new shopping
experience good morning big name
retailers are set to extend their
opening hours for monday but i look at
why consumer retail therapy
could cause a headache for smaller shops
good morning liverpool lose in the
champions league but manchester city
find a last-minute winner to take the
advantage
over borussia dortmund from a palatial
yoga studio to a pub in the back garden
we'll look at the runners and riders
for shed of the year good morning it's a
frosty start to the day today
but it's not going to be as windy as
yesterday so it won't feel quite
as cold although there are still some
wintry showers in the forecast
and later some patchy rain coming into
northern ireland
i'll have all the details in 10 minutes
[Music]
good morning it's wednesday it's the 7th
of april and the top story this morning
is that a trial of the oxford
astrazeneca covered vaccine on children
has been temporarily paused while the uk
regulator investigates concerns at the
jab may be causing red blood clots
in a tiny number of adults the pause is
voluntary and none of the 300 children
involved in the trial has suffered a
clot as our medical editor fergus walsh
reports
nearly 300 children aged 6 to 17 are
taking part in the astrazeneca vaccine
trial in england which began in february
oxford university said there'd be
no blood clots in the volunteers but out
of an abundance of caution
it had stopped vaccinations pending the
outcome of the safety review
in adults more than 18 million
people in the uk have received the
astrazeneca vaccine
the mhra said last week there'd been 30
rare cases of blood clots including
seven deaths
the prime minister visiting an
astrazeneca plant in macclesfield
once again gave his firm support for the
vaccine
the best thing people should do is is
look at what the
uh the mhra say our independent
regulator that's that's why we have them
that's why they're
uh they're independent and their advice
to people is to
uh you know keep going out there get
your get your jab get your second
jab as a precautionary measure the mhra
updated its advice last month to say
that anyone
with a headache that lasted for more
than four days
after receiving the astrazeneca vaccine
or bruising beyond the sight of the jab
should seek medical attention both of
the vaccines we're using are highly
effective
against covid and the risks of getting
sick or dying of covid
for all the people currently being
offered first and second doses
are far and away greater than any small
theoretical risk that may exist
relating to these cases which are
extremely rare this could be very much
compromised if people think that this
isn't being taken seriously that this
isn't being examined in great detail but
i think
individuals have a difficulties in sort
of understanding risks and perceptions
and you know seeing this
in relation to other sorts of um
illnesses or diseases or outcomes the
astrazeneca vaccine
is central to the huge success of the
rollout of
jabs in the uk which is way ahead of the
rest of europe
france has restricted the astrazeneca
vaccine to adults over 55
germany to those over 60 because of
concerns about blood clots
in younger adults the european medicines
agency
and the uk regulator are due to give
updated recommendations in the next day
or two
maintaining public confidence in this
highly effective vaccine
will be vital fergus walsh bbc news
the coronavirus vaccine made by the
american company moderna will be
administered
in the uk for the first time today the
rollout will begin in camarden
in west wales the uk has ordered 17
million doses of the vaccine which has
been shown in trials
to prevent nearly all infections it will
be used alongside the pfizer and
astrazeneca jabs the welsh government
has described its arrival as another key
milestone in the fight against the virus
a comedy club has pulled out of a trial
to test how venues can operate safely
when lockdown ends after receiving
thousands of abusive messages
the hot water comedy club in liverpool
says it was falsely linked to a scheme
to test vaccine passports leading to
what it describes as a hate campaign
on social media a government
spokesperson said they
strongly condemn the online abuse and
the club received
that the club was received and clarified
that participants in the trial would
only need to provide a negative covid
test
not proof of vaccination
researchers say that people diagnosed
with covid19 are at greater risk of
developing
psychological and neurological
conditions such as depression
psychosis and stroke the team from
oxford university examined the health
records of more than half a million
patients in the united states
here's more from our health reporter
rachel shreya
coronavirus breaks into our cells and
multiplies
whatever in the body it finds itself
that's why it causes such a wide range
of symptoms
from the lungs to the gut to the brain
the team at the university of oxford
looked at over half a million patient
records in the u.s
to see if conditions affecting the brain
were more common in those who'd had
covered
they looked at 14 conditions including
anxiety depression and psychosis
stroke brain hemorrhage and dementia all
of these conditions were seen more often
than people who'd had a covet infection
in the previous six months
but these conditions all have very
different causes it could be that in
some people the virus actually gets into
the brain and causes
some damage it could be the way your
body is reacting to the virus
produces a sort of an immune or
inflammatory response that again
contributes to the problems
and for other people it may simply be a
psychological effect if you like of the
stress that having covered and thinking
what might happen to you next
is the important factor the study
couldn't prove the virus itself was
definitely causing the changes
but patients recovering from covid were
more likely than similar people who'd
had
flu or another infection to develop a
psychological
or neurological condition and the sicker
coronavirus patients had been
the more likely they were to develop
these complications
rachel schreyer bbc news
doctors have been told not to prescribe
painkillers to people suffering from
chronic pain that has
no known cause the national institute
for health and care excellence says
there's
little to no evidence that treating
people with paracetamol or opioids makes
any difference it says people should be
offered a range of therapies including
exercise acupuncture or antidepressants
instead britain's electricity system was
the greenest it's ever been at lunchtime
on easter monday would you believe
according to the national grid operator
sunny and windy weather coupled with low
demand meant almost 80 percent of
britain's power came from zero carbon
sources
no coals in use and just 10 percent of
power
came from gas the duke of cambridge has
paid tribute to nhs workers during the
pandemic describing the institution as
probably the most admired
organization around prince william and
kate have taken part in a series of
video conversations with medics
across the uk in recent months and in
the latest the duke praised their
wonderful efforts
good morning
i just want to say on behalf of everyone
what a fantastic job you've done
you've all held them
[Music]
team effort but we're together very
proud of you
[Music]
the nhs has gone from already being much
loved to probably the most admired
organizations around
[Music]
a seal that had a plastic ring stuck
around its neck for two and a half years
has finally had it removed
the animal named mrs vicar would you
believe was rescued from horsey beach
near great yarmouth
she's been cared for by the rspca who
said
that hopefully she will fully recover
but she will need treatment for a number
of months the united states is facing a
shortage of
tomato ketchup heinz which produces the
most popular brand says it's been unable
to keep up with demand
for sachets of the source it's been
driven by a surge in takeaway food
during the pandemic yeah that's
a tragedy yeah so it's it's just a
little it's a little package
because they don't obviously don't want
to share tomato ketchup as well
it's very are you a do you have tomato
ketchup with chips or mayonnaise
oh very bad controversial apparently the
belgian
apparently the belgian start is that
right yes it is is that right yeah
absolutely okay i'm glad we've cleared
that up
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news